U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
REPORT TO CONGRESS
Fiscal Year 2025
MEDICARE NATIONAL
COVERAGE
DETERMINATIONS
April 2026
Page 1
This is the 25th annual report to Congress on Medicare National Coverage Determinations (NCDs)
from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). Consistent with section 1869(f)(7) of the
Social Security Act (the Act), CMS reports the amount of time it took to complete and implement all
NCDs (including NCDs for items and services not previously covered as Medicare benefits) made
between October 1, 2024, and September 30, 2025. In fiscal year (FY) 2025, we achieved an average
time of 5.9 months from the date of a formal request to the date of publication of the proposed decision
memorandum (DM), which met the statutory timeframe set by section 1862(l)(2) of the Act.
Additionally, it took an average of 268 days from date of publication of the proposed DM to the final
DM,1 which exceeds the statutory timeframe set forth at section 1862(l)(3) of the Act. It took an
average of an additional 202 days to fully implement the payment and coding changes for NCDs to
cover an item or service from the date the final DM was published on the CMS website. (Coding
changes occur on a fixed quarterly cycle.)
Medicare payment is contingent on a determination that an item or service fits within a statutory
benefit category, is not specifically excluded from coverage, and in most circumstances, that the item
or service is “reasonable and necessary” for Medicare beneficiaries. Section 1862(a)(1)(A) of the Act
states that, subject to certain limited exceptions, no payment may be made for any expenses incurred
for items or services that are not “reasonable and necessary for the diagnosis or treatment of illness or
injury or to improve the functioning of a malformed body member.” CMS exercises these authorities
to make coverage determinations regarding whether specific items or services fit within one of the
broadly defined benefit categories and can be covered under the Medicare program.
National Coverage Determinations (NCDs)
As defined in section 1862(1) of the Act, an NCD entails a determination by the Secretary with respect
to whether or not a particular item or service is covered nationally under title XVIII of the Act. In
general, an NCD is a national policy statement granting, limiting, or excluding Medicare coverage for
a particular medical item or service. An NCD is usually written in terms of a specific patient
population that may receive (or not receive) Medicare payment for a particular item or service. NCDs
are binding on all Medicare Administrative Contractors (MACs), Quality Improvement Organizations,
Qualified Independent Contractors, Administrative Law Judges at the Office of Medicare Hearings and
Appeals (OMHA) , and the Medicare Appeals Council at the Department Appeals Board (DAB).
Since multiple MACs process and pay claims for Medicare beneficiaries, it takes time to communicate
precisely how to implement these uniform national policies, once a decision is made. Implementation
may include technical, localized computer systems changes, and/or changes to multiple shared
computer systems that involve all Medicare fee-for-service contractors and system maintainers.
Beneficiaries are protected by the NCD’s effective date when an NCD expands coverage, even if
computer system edits are delayed. Medicare instructions include an effective date that establishes
when items and services will be covered (or not covered), as well as an implementation date indicating
the last day contractors have to complete all required system edits.
CMS uses the phrase “national coverage analysis” (NCA) to describe the process for making an NCD.
In FY 2025, CMS implemented two NCDs and initiated four new NCAs.
1 The effective date for an NCD coincides with the date the final decision memorandum is published consistent with
sections 1862(a)(1)(A) and 1862(1) of the Act. The average is skewed by one NCD, see Table 1.
Page 2
• Implemented in FY 2025:
o Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT) for Myelodysplastic
Syndromes (MDS) (initiated FY 2023)
o Preexposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) Using Antiretroviral Therapy to Prevent Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection (initiated FY 2023)
• Initiated in FY 2025:
o Transcatheter Edge-to-Edge Repair for Tricuspid Valve Regurgitation (T-TEER)
o Cardiac Contractility Modulation (CCM) for Heart Failure
o Renal Denervation for Uncontrolled Hypertension
o Screening for Colorectal Cancer-Non-Invasive Biomarker Tests
Statutory timeframes for completing NCDs:
• Six months: From a formal request to publication of the proposed NCD (nine months if there is
an external Technology Assessment [TA] or a Medicare Evidence Development & Coverage
Advisory Committee [MEDCAC] meeting). In FY 25, no NCDs or NCAs were referred to a
MEDCAC or TA.
• 90 days: From the date of publication of a proposed NCD to release of a final NCD.
Table 1 below presents the details of each NCD implemented in FY 2025, including the outcome of
CMS review and the completion times.
Table 2 below presents the details of each NCA initiated in FY 2025.
Table 1: NCDs Implemented in FY 2025
Decisions initiated in FY 2023 and Proposed NCD
NCA type/result Final DM3
implemented in FY 2025 DM2 implemented4
Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell
First
Transplantation (HSCT) for Myelodysplastic 6 90 215
Reconsideration
Syndromes (MDS)
Preexposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) Using
Antiretroviral Therapy to Prevent Human New 5.9 4465 189
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection
AVERAGE 5.9 268 202
2 Months elapsed from date of opening coverage analysis to date of proposed NCD posted on CMS Website.
3 Days elapsed from date of proposed NCD to date of final NCD. (The Social Security Act requires that the final NCD
include changes made as a result of the 30-day public comment period and a summary of, and responses to, all public
comments received.)
4 Days elapsed from date of final NCD posted on CMS website (i.e., policy effective date) to date of published
implementation instructions.
5 The final NCD on PrEP was not posted by the expected completion date of October 10, 2023. A final decision is
forthcoming.
Page 3
Table 2: NCAs Initiated in FY 2025
Proposed NCD
Decisions initiated in FY 2024 but not finalized NCA type/result 2 Final DM3
DM implemented4
Transcatheter Edge-to-Edge Repair for Tricuspid
New 6 90 1/05/26
Valve Regurgitation (T-TEER)
Cardiac Contractility Modulation (CCM) for
New 5.9 110 4/06/26
Heart Failure
Renal Denervation for Uncontrolled Hypertension New 5.8 110 4/06/26
Screening for Colorectal Cancer-Non-Invasive First No Final NCD Not
6
Biomarker Tests Reconsideration DM Issued Implemented
Factors CMS Considers in Commissioning External Technology Assessments
During the NCD process, CMS may determine that it needs an external TA to assist in evaluating the
evidence. In many cases, this will occur following the opening of an NCD. In other cases, we may
determine that we need an external TA to evaluate the available evidence prior to deciding on the need
for an NCD review. There may also be instances when an external TA will help inform us on the
status of the evidence on certain topics of interest to the Agency.
CMS explains the factors we consider in commissioning an external TA in published guidance.6 In
general, CMS may request an external TA if one or more of the following conditions applies:
• The body of evidence to review is extensive, making it difficult to complete an internal TA
within the six-month statutory timeframe.
• An independent formulation of the appropriate assessment questions and methodological
approach to an issue is desirable given the complexity or conflicting nature of the medical and
scientific literature available.
• Significant differences in opinion among experts concerning the relevant evidence or in the
interpretation of data suggest that an independent analysis of all relevant literature will be of
value.
• The review requires unique technical and/or clinical expertise not available within CMS at the
time of the review.
• The review calls for specialized methods (e.g., decision modeling, meta-analysis) in health
technology assessment.
• The topic under consideration will be referred for consideration to the MEDCAC.
• Relevant, non-proprietary, but unpublished data could be collected and analyzed.
Factors CMS Considers in Referring Topics to the MEDCAC
6 CMS, Factors CMS Considers in Commissioning External Technology Assessments, April 11, 2006, available at
https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/medicare-coverage-document.aspx?MCDId=7.
Page 4
We explain the factors we consider in referring a topic to the MEDCAC in published guidance.7 Per
this guidance document, CMS may refer a topic to the MEDCAC under any of the following
circumstances:
• There is significant controversy among experts. The opinions of clinical and scientific
experts vary about the medical benefit of the item or service, the level of competence of
providers, the requirements of facilities, or some other significant consideration that would
affect whether the item or service is "reasonable and necessary" under the Social Security
Act.
• The existing published studies contain potentially significant methodological issues such as
flawed design, inappropriate data analysis, or small sample size.
• The available research has not addressed policy-relevant questions.
• The available research has not addressed diseases and conditions or the special needs of the
Medicare population.
• The existing published studies show conflicting results.
• CMS would like additional expert review of the methods used in external TAs, particularly
when there are questions about a TA, about complex clinical issues, or about specialized
methods such as decision modeling.
• CMS would like greater public input by receiving and considering comments on the
effectiveness of an item or service that could be subject to varying interpretations; or it
would be helpful to obtain the perspective of affected patients and caregivers (e.g., the
degree of perceived benefit, subjective assessment of risk, or burden of side effects)
through public comments and voting representatives on the panel.
• Use of the technology is the subject of controversy among the general public.
• Presentation, public discussion, and clarification of the appropriate scope for the technical
review, a preferred methodological approach, or a clinical management issue would benefit
future NCDs.
• Dissemination of a technology may have a major impact on the Medicare program, the
Medicare population, or clinical care for specific beneficiary groups.
• CMS determines that the NCD process would be better informed by deliberation that
incorporates the viewpoint of patient advocates as well as a broad societal perspective of
factors not directly related to the scientific review of the evidence but nevertheless relevant
to the decision.
7 CMS, Factors CMS Considers in Referring Topics to the Medicare Evidence Development & Coverage Advisory
Committee, Dec. 12, 2006, available at https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/view/medicare-coverage-
document.aspx?MCDId=10.